---
layout: post
title:  "The Simple Beauty of the Weather Glass"
date:   2019-07-31 10:43:36 -0600
categories: writing
---
In the final chapters of Hemingway's _Islands In the Stream_, protagonist Thomas Hudson finds himself captaining a small crew of American sailors chasing survivors of a German submarine wreck across the Caribbean during World War II. The Germans, before being discovered, escape the submarine wreck and make it to a remote Caribbean island, then subsequently burn down the few huts they've discovered before stealing a small boat, livestock, and water. Hudson's crew, on routine patrol, stops at the island to refill their water supply only days after the Germans have departed. They discover the murders, and from the rifling on a bullet dug out from a skull among the charred ashes, discover that a German-made firearm is responsible: "They were 9mm standard issue for the Schmeisser machine pistol."

This all takes place in the last third of Hemingway's posthumous novel, and not only draws on his adventures during the first and second World Wars, but also shows his intimate knowledge of ship and sea, as only one who has spent much time on them could. While there are many passages that stuck out to me for either their beautiful prose ("It was her. No one else got out of a car that way, practically and easily and beautifully and at the same time as though she were doing the street a great favor when she stepped on it,") or poetic sadness ("At sea he thought about...his desperate, hopeless love,"), one in particular confused me:

> An hour before daylight he was below and had checked his glass. It was four-tenths lower and he woke his mate and showed it to him. The mate looked at him and nodded. "You saw the squalls over Romano yesterday," he whispered. "She is going into the south."

Hemingway, like Hudson, was a notorious drinker. Much of the first third of this book finds Hudson with a drink of some sort in his hand. When I read this passage on _"his glass"_, I immediately thought Hudson was checking his drink, but when the first mate mentions the "squalls over Romano," you understand that it's not a drink, but something for weather -- a barometer.

Their creation story is up for debate, but barometers appear [to have come about between 1640 (Gasparo Berti) and 1643 (Evangelista Torricelli)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barometer), and the idea of the barometer possibly even came from Descartes in 1630. Since Torricelli gets the modern credit, let's go with 1643. That means there are roughly 376 years worth of people that have had the chance to know how barometers worked before I ever took the time to. I remember my dad talking about a "low pressure front", or seeing a weather man with a hairstyle twenty years behind the times and wearing a suit that fell oddly limp across his shoulders, moving his arms in an arc against a computer-generated map, showing a storm blowing in and talking about the "drop in barometric pressure," but I didn't ever to stop to think about how ignorant I was on the subject until I followed Thomas Hudson below the deck. 

I could write now about Torricelli's barometer, giving you a heavily-plagiarized answer about how a glass tube was filled with mercury, then inverted into a basin also filled with mercury, then instead of running completely out of the tube and into the basin, the level of mercury would fluctuate given changes in atmospheric pressure. I could go on, plagiarizing another source, about how the water-based barometer--perhaps similar to what Hudson used while chasing Germans--works by having a capped container of water attached to a narrow spout, which is open to the atmosphere. The water in the narrow spout rises and falls due to the amount of air pressure on the water, puling the water higher as air pressure decreases and pushing the water lower as air pressure increases. A sailor in the open sea would be happy to see the water in the tube lower. High pressure means less wind, and smoother sailing is ahead. 

> It was a lovely day and looking back at the bight where they had anchored and at the beach and the scrub trees of Cayo Cruz that they both knew so well, Thomas Hudson and Ara saw the high, piled clouds over the land. Cayo Romano rose so that it was like the mainland and the clouds where high above it with their promise of south wind or calm and land squalls.
> ...
> "What would you think if you were a German, Ara?" Thomas Hudson asked. "What would you think if you saw that and you knew you were going to lose your wind?" "I'd try to get inside," Ara said. "I think that's what I'd do."

Three centuries after its discovery, two groups of men from two halves of the world now rely on their weather glasses. One group dismayed by the low pressure and the water falling in the tube like sand in an hourglass. The other invigorated by the prospects of making up ground on a quarry with a three-day head start. Had the weather glass tube been filled with high water, the Germans could've expected favorable winds, and increased their odds of escape into the vast, anonymous sea. Instead, Hemingway gives the Americans one final chance.

Take the time to look at pictures of a weather glass, or its earliest cousin in the form of [Goethe's barometer](https://www.curiousminds.co.uk/the-goethe-barometer.html). Look back at a time where people cared to think about things, to devise experiments, to fail, to revise, and to craft beautiful instruments. The weather glass is beautiful not just because of its design, but because such a simple instrument gave us power to better understand the sea. Find a work to be proud of, and remember the words of Thomas Hudson: "life is a cheap thing beside a man's work." 

Jeff Nunn / 2019 July 31